Well, um, are we live?
Hello everyone! Welcome to the WordPress Accessibility Day 2020. My name is Roberto Remedios.
I'm, I'm user experience, user interface designer. I live in San Jose, Costa Rica I als, I'm also
an accessibility advocate. I've been working on
Latin America with accessibility with different
groups of people - deaf people, blind people and um,
I mean, I love to share with all you guys tonight.
I forgot to do thanks on the last talk uh
to our sponsors, to to our organizers and to
my moderator, Kevin who is pasting the the
questions that you guys had on YouTube into the
page. Please, remember if you have any questions,
just put the questions on the YouTube chat.
Uh, our next speaker is Susanna Laurin and she
will be talking about accessibility by default
in authoring tools. She is chief research and
Innovation Innovation officer at Funka. She have
more than 20 years of experience in working with
uh accessibility at the senior management level,
she is an internationally expert on the European
Union accessibility policy and regulations
and she have did several workshops and write
some books about the specific EN standard so
you have the control right now so sign up thank
you for joining us uh you can share your screen.
[Susanna] Okay. Thank you, Roberto! I think I'm now sharing my
screen and hopefully I also have my microphone on.
Is this working?
You can nod, at least. [Roberto] Yes, it's working.
[Susanna] Okay, perfect thank you. So good morning, everyone! I'm doing this from Sweden, Europe, so it's very
early Saturday morning and I want to tell you
straight away that I'm not a developer. So if you
have technical questions around my presentation
I would be happy to forward them to our developers.
I can't get them to wake up this early in the
morning on a Saturday, so unfortunately you will
have to, um, to live just with me but thank you for
having me on this Marathon accessibility event.
It's exciting. So, I can't make this work, why, yeah .
Yeah, so just a little bit about me. I am the
chief research and Innovation officer at Funka,
I'm also the representative of the UN initiative
G3ICT and the International Association of
Accessibility Professionals representative to the
EU. I do a lot of strategic consulting these days
mainly for the European Union but also for um
EU member states, national governments, when
they are transposing their the EU legislation
into national law. Um, I did, I'm leading the Radix
subgroup which is an expert group helping the
commission and the member states implementing
the web accessibility directive, one of the recent
legislations in this area, and I'm also one of the
technical experts in the ETSI special task force
536. And we have been responsible for updating and
harmonizing the EN standard which is the minimum
requirements of the legislation in in Europe.
Um, just a couple of words on the, on the
company I work for - Funka - we are specialists
in accessibility, uh, but we were founded by
the disability movement in Sweden and we
um, we started as an NGO, really but we
converted into a private company in the year of
2000. We have our headquarters in Stockholm,
and and offices also in Oslo, and Madrid, and
Brussels. We do consulting and development on
accessibility and usability, we do also a lot of
research and innovation and that's nowadays
the department that I lead, and so we
do national projects and also European and Global
projects in research and innovation. And we also
cover policy and and different kind of studies
and investigations and we are of course also
engaged in standardization, which is extremely
important if you want to do accessibility. Also
one of the proud founders of the International
Association of Accessibility Professionals.
So, in Europe, the web accessibility directive
is really turning everything upside down here.
We have been living in a world where we have
more recommendations on accessibility than
actual regulations, and this is now changing.
We started with a procurement directive a
couple of years ago, now the web accessibility
directive is covering public sector, and in 2022
we will also have the European Accessibility Act
which will cover products and services in some
of the private sectors. We are really moving
from recommendations to, to regulations. And
it's an interesting time to be alive, here,
but we have a couple of problems when when
this is happening, of course, and um, and
one of the biggest problems that we have,
um tried to to solve or looked into at least, is
that really, really that accessibility is much
more than a technical issue, of course, and
around 50 percent of the accessibility problems or
fails that we encounter when we do audits - they
are created by web authors. And this is not a
surprise, because many web authors - and this is
now in in public sector mainly - and most of the
web authors are not professional communication
people, and absolute vast majority of them are
not accessibility experts. So, of course they do
create content that is not perfectly accessible.
And, and this means that we now have approximately
7 million interfaces that are supposed to, to
comply with the new regulations and with seven
million interfaces we have, I don't know I can't
even count the number of web authors that would
need training to, to make this work. And of course
that's good for us, because we are specializing
in this, and we're happy to provide training, but
it just won't scale. It's not enough just to put
out manuals and training and, and you know trying
to make all these web authors do the right thing,
because it, people change their job, they, um they
get on [parent leave, parental leave or or
you know, we change people all the time. So we just
need to do something else than only training,
because that, that is not, will never be enough.
And that's when, when the idea came that - what if
accessibility could be built into the websites
from the start? What if the authoring tools could
do something to help, here? Um, maybe everything
can't be automized, but at least the authoring
tools should have a possibility to give much
better support to the web authors. That was sort
of the idea behind this, this research projects.
And we managed to lobby for this idea and make
more people interested in it, and after a while
the European commission came out with a, with a
call for, um, for proposals on trying to see if
authoring tools could actually, uh, be part of
the solution here. So, um, the European funding
for research, and very common way of doing this,
is that you first, you apply for a pilot project,
where you sort of prove that your idea or thesis is
valid, and that there is something here to, to keep
um, looking into, and then, if you're successful in
your pilot, then you can also have the possibility
to make what is called a preparatory action.
Which is where you actually perform the real
research or, or whatever initiative is needed
to be done. So it's a two-step process, often .
and um we did get the opportunity to have a, to
perform a pilot project a couple of years ago ,
where we looked at the 30 most used tools in the
public sector bodies in in the EU. So we, we crawled
the internet for public sector bodies and, and
found the 30 most used tools, to make sure that we,
um, the efforts were made on the most frequently
used ones. And we did some piloting and testing, so
trying to see what happens if you, if you're not
an expert in accessibility, and you're procuring
this tool, and maybe your, your supplier is
also not an expert in accessibility, because
that is the normal case - that is the majority of
these situations. What happens then? If you just
acquire an authoring tool and a website for
somebody, from somebody that is not an expert,
how accessible is it then? It's like, I know this is
really theoretic, because it's not really possible,
but the idea is if you just sort of push the
button and up comes a website from your package
then how accessible is it by default. What
is built-in there. And the answer was: not much.
But we did a lot of surveys and prototypes, we
talked to, uh to suppliers and, and vendors and tool
makers, and so on, try to figure out how much is
really included in the, sort of, basic, the standard
templates, and so on. And we did a lot of analysis
and also user testing, of course. User testing both
with web authors, and also end users with, with
disabilities to, to make sure that the results
were valid from both perspectives. And we did also
work a lot with different stakeholders in, and that
this was before the Corona so we, we could make, um
physical workshops in Brussels. We had specific, uh
webs, workshops with web authors from public sector,
to see what are the user needs; how can the authoring
tools help these web authors to, to make
the right thing. It should be easy to, to do the
right thing when you create content. And we also
discussed with the end users with disabilities
of course, which are the most common problems or
fails, or what is the biggest barrier to you .
And also looking into the, the back office, so to
speak, so if if the Web author has a disability, how
accessible is the actual interface that you meet
as, as author. So the, the back end, so to speak, the
input part of the of the authoring tools. And then
we also discussed with the tool makers and other
vendors, suppliers, and also standardization bodies.
So we had a series of workshops where we, where we
really collected user needs and experiences
from this for different stakeholder groups.
And the result from this pilot was that, well, there
is not much accessibility by default out there in
the most used tool, unfortunately, but they're big
demand. And also we thought that there would be, um
well, a good potential to do something. If something
is not perfect, then you have the the potential
to, to make it better. So, the result of the pilot
was really a matrix of, of the most used tools.
And also we made three sets of guidelines for web
authors, or people who are procuring or looking for
a tool, and also for end users with disabilities,
and for the industry. And really this was then the
starting point for further research. And the result
of this um, on the part, the open parts and not
everything is, is public, but the public parts of
this project results can be found on our website.
It's www.funka, which is f-u-n-k-a.com slash we4authors.
So "we" and the number 4, and "authors."
And then, of course, the next phase started and
we were happy enough to, to get also the second
phase funded by the commission. And we are now, uh
a third into, um the preparatory action which
is called "we4authors cluster" and here we, we
work with a cluster of tool makers, because we
think we need now to dig deep into the the real
code and the real, um potential of this. So, based
on the user needs that we found in the pilots,
and we are going to create new features that
can be adapted into whatever tool you use. We
are going to do extensive user testing to make
sure that the features that we create are really
good - they're user friendly, they are solving the
right problems, and that the web authors like them.
Because otherwise they won't be a success. And we
are then going to try to implement these features
in different kinds of tools, so that we make sure
that we can reach as big part of the market as
possible. And, and we are then, when the project
is finished, by July next year, we are going to
share code, if there, if we are resulting in code,
which I hope, or, if we can't produce the code,
then at least we will share the documentation,
and prototypes, videos, visits, or whatever it can be
from the user testing, to show as inspiration for
others. Because maybe everything can't just be a
snippet of code, and then you can just implement it
quickly into whatever tool, maybe life is not that
easy, always, so we will also describe the feature,
and describe how it works, and what people liked
with it. And so that then, the rest of the market
can, hopefully, use those ideas and for inspiration,
and also implement these ideas in their own tools.
And this is really an important part of of, of
all European research, of course, that, that the
result is going to be for the common good. So this
is not something we, or the partners, will, will keep
um, behind any closed doors - the idea is,
is really to share with the community.
And the members of this cluster, right now,
are Drupal, um, we have um Mike Gifford of Open
Concept who is representing Drupal, here. We
have Plone, represented by Timo Stollenwerk from
kitconcept, in Germany. We have SiteVision,
a Swedish licensed, um licensed-based authoring
tool. We have Joomla, um, and Brian Teeman is the
representative for Joomla, and the foundation of
Joomla in Germany, it's also a part of the project.
And we have Umbraco, represented by Sigma in the UK.
So, these are the cluster members who are
representing different kind of, of authoring
tools. And we are, of course, also working with other
tool providers, and, but we are also closely related
to the International Association of Accessibility
Professionals, so that we can reach out to both
vendors, and also, um, customers using these tools,
and the end user organizations. So, with IAAP we,
we have a really broad outreach, apart from, from
the partners own networks, so to speak, and we also
work closely with ERRIN, which is the European
Regions Research and Innovation Network. So, in
with this network we can also make sure that
we reach a lot of the public sector bodies' web
authors in, in Europe for user testing and, and
also making sure that the user requirements are,
are met in a really, uh, relevant way for them.
After the discussions with, with the
stakeholders and the different user groups, and
specifically, of course, the web authors, their
needs, and also the ideas and experiences from our
cluster members, so, to make sure that whatever we
do is, is sort of relevant, and possible to use also
for the tool makers, we have, we set up a set of
criteria for, for how the features would; what
kind of um, what kind of problems we wanted to, to
solve, how frequently this um, problem was occurring,
and so on. And then, based on these criteria we
selected 10 different features that we wanted
to try with users. So now we are, specifically, in
the position in the, in the project where we are,
we have already selected 10 features, and we are
now going to user test them, starting in October.
um so we are, right now, finishing or refining
the prototypes, that we are then going to, to
test in an iterative process, of course, inviting
users, web authors, and others interested to test
the prototypes and come with, come back to us with
feedback, so that we can refine them, and make them
better and better. So, we have until Christmas to do
this, really, but we're starting here in October. So
the features that we have, um, selected to try and
make sure that we can support users, web authors
with, is really how to provide alt text -alternative
text -on, on images. It's a very basic thing but
we have seen that this is solved in different ways,
in different authoring tools, and sometimes it's
quite hard to make it in a good way, and sometimes
it's, well, you have the possibility to add the alt
text, but you don't get any support on how to write
it, or when to write it on or when not, and so on. So
the whole idea here is to provide more support.
If something can be, maybe, mandatory we will try
to make it mandatory. Alt texts can't really be
mandatory, because not all images need them, and
so on, but we can also prompt for the Web author
to do something, so it's really visible, it's really
um, you're sort of pushed to do the right
thing. You shouldn't be, um, you shouldn't have
to look for the place where to write the alt text.
It should be very obvious and sort of "in the flow"
of your authoring process. And then the, we
can also provide, maybe, support in different, at
different levels, or information. So we have all
this sort of the levels of, of automation we can
do - we can either build it in, so that it's really,
by default, making it accessible; or we can prompt
it, or we can make information, or, or support in
in other ways. So we will try different ways of
doing this, and see what the web authors find most
useful, and then present that to, to the market, when
we have a good decision there. So alt text is the
first one, and then we are also prototyping now the
possibility to change language, um, when you have
a multiple language on a, on a website or a page,
which is very common in, in the European context.
We often have websites with, with more than one
language. Also, we're looking at documentation of
the accessibility features, because our research
has shown that many web authors don't really know
what their authoring tool can do. So how can we
make the documentation better, and also, how can we
make it, or we want to try, if it's better to have
the documentation - the information -that support
in a wizards, sort of "in context," so where you
are actually performing, doing something, that is
when, where you can find the information. Or, if
that may be disturbing for you, because the user
experience will be then, maybe, too crowded, or too
overwhelming with all this information. So, maybe
it's better to have it sort of on the side, that
you need to go look for it. And we have we have
seen different situations, different contexts, and
also different Web author groups who prefer one or
the other, so this will be really interesting to do
AB testing on. Um, of course some of the really big
troublemakers in authoring is tables and forms, so
we are going to test supportive tables creators
and also forms editors in different way, that can
um, a combination of making it accessible by
default, and supporting on when you do more
complex tables and forms. Of course, everything
can't be automated, or at least not now,
um, maybe in the future, but we want to to
make sure that the author has better support,
uh, in doing the right thing. When it comes
to video, we are testing supporting
the editor on how to make sure that the
video is compliant with the regulations.
And then we have four features that are sort
of connected to each other, and they all have
to do with testing. So we want to try out
how to best test accessibility while, or
when you are editing or publishing something.
So we are trying to have testing procedures built
into the editor, so while you're actually creating
the content. And then another specific sort of
easy win if, if we support web authors in, in
providing accessible documents. Especially,
specifically PDF documents which is, all over the
world, I think we have unaccessible or inaccessible
um documents, and that is a a big issue that
many web authors tell us they would like to
have support in. So, some kind of testing before you,
or while you're uploading your documents, so that
you know if the document is okay or not. And then
we want to test the full page. So when you have
um, provided all the images, and the objects, and
the content that you are going to to publish,
then during this content creative, creation
phase, you could also test all the different
parts and objects that you are, um, going to, to
publish. So before publishing just check if it's
accessible or not, and then, of course, helping
you to remediate this will be an important part.
And maybe not specifically for the Web author,
but for the website owner, or the person who is
responsible for the whole, accessibility, um,
the accessibility of the whole website, then
of course there could also be a
built-in testing tool for the whole website.
And please note that we are not building a new, eh,
automatic tools for accessibility testing. There
are many out there and some of them are really
good. So we are not going to test if they are
good or bad, it's just the how can they be combined,
or included, or implemented, in the authoring tool
or in the content creation phase, so that it
supports the, the web authors in a better way.
Because what we see is that many of the testing
tools are quite technical. And they may be very
helpful for developers, but the web authors are
sometimes not very technical, so it can't be too,
um, sort of, success criteria related and
really technical in the way it's presented.
It needs to, to support you in, in another
way. And we think combining it into the
content creation phase could be really
helpful for at least some other web authors.
So these are the 10 features that we are now
prototyping, and going to test, and these are going
to be test like generic tests, and so that we have
made them anonymous, so to speak, so we are trying
to just test the feature it, and the prototypes are
not supposed to look like any specific tool, but
it wouldn't, it shouldn't be important which
tool you're used to use, but you should be, sort of,
recognizing the, the content creation, how it looks
when you, when you edit content. That is the, the
idea. So, we're doing, um, this testing on a prototype
level, and then when we, when we have learned more
or less what the web authors need or or want, then
we're also going to do test implementations in the
cluster members. So all the authoring tools that
are working with us in this project also have the
possibility to, to test the, these features in their
own, um, in the technical environments, so to
speak. Of course it takes time to implement these
things in authoring tools and, and maybe we won't
be finishing this before the project is finished,
but at least we want to make sure that we have
done some test implementations, so that we can also
say that we know that these, these features work
in at least some of the technical environments
that we have tested, because that makes it more
probable that they will also be possible to use
for other tool makers. So the test implementation
in the specific tools is also an important part.
But what we are trying, doing right now is first
of all the generic testing. And because of the
pandemic we will do, we will do some face-to-face,
um, physical testing at our offices, but most of
the testing, so, the quantitative part of it will
be online. So it's actually open for anyone that
would like to, to test these features and we are
happy to welcome anyone. And we'll come back to
that. So, um, will this solve all the accessibility
problems of the world? No, it won't. But we believe
that built-in accessibility by default in
authoring tools could be an important part of
the solution. If we succeed in this. Um, because,
I mean, this is kind of obvious, but if you, if the
authoring tool is supporting you in your content
creation phase, then you can avoid unnecessary
mistakes. And this is really the primary goal here.
Um, accessibility by default can make it. We can,
we can start with the hygiene factors that the
authoring tools shouldn't, sort of, create
accessibility problems, but it should also
support the author in not doing that mistakes.
Another important part here is really to
help the non-experts to get it right from the
start. Because, as I mentioned before, most of the
web authors in public sector are, are not
specializing in communication, and definitely
not specializing in accessibility. So we also hope
that this can mean that the governments can create
framework contracts, so in the centralized
procurement that is very use, much in use
in, in some of the European member states, which
can mean that tool makers that do provide
accessibility by default using our features or,
or other services, but, but some, in some way can
prove that they, they do provide good support for
web authors, they can then have a, um, an advantage
in the competition, by being sort of checked on
beforehand by, by the central procurement system.
So that is what we're hoping. That a group of
tools will be, sort of, the front runners here, and
they will then have the possibility to easier
at least sell their services to public sector.
And with that, experts in accessibility, and also
experts in, in tool making can, and the web authors
themselves can, focus on more interesting things,
or more complex issues, and sort of solving the
rest of the problems that we can't solve in this
problem. But that is the, that is the aim of these
projects. So, I would like to invite you all
to make contact to us and if you are like to, or
if you, one of your clients or customers would like
to try, if you have any web authors, if you know web
authors that would like, are interested in trying
out these features, then please do contact us.
There is room for everyone who wants to, to
contribute to this, and of course the more test
persons we have, from the more parts most part
of the world, and with different backgrounds
and so on, the better it will be. So the results
will really depend on, on the users who want to
test. We already have, um, quite a lot of testers. I
think, at least, over 100 organizations have, have
said that they would like to to join the
testing phase, but we are always welcoming
more. So please do contact us. You can use my
email, which is Susanna s-u-s-a-double n-a at funka.com.
And we also have a project website. It's not
very active yet, because we don't have so much,
um, results yet to show, but we will
be more active in this website
soon, I hope. So you're also welcome to
follow the project on accessibilitycluster.com.
And with that, I'm open for questions.
[Roberto] Um, well thank you very much Susanna.
We don't have a lot of questions, we
have one main question at this moment. Is, is
the next one. You mentioned you will develop
new features, uh, do you have examples of
what kind of features are good candidates?
[Susanna] Well, before we started testing them we don't
know which ones are the best candidates. That's
really is the test - it's the 10 features that
I talked about, and showed the slide. These are
the features that we are now testing, and if
they all turn out not to work, or not to be,
um, of interest for web authors, then we will
have to come up with new ones. Because we have
promised the European commission who
is funding this that we are going to,
um, to promote or provide 10 - at least 10 features
when, when the project is ready. But as we are
just starting the testing phase, I can't tell you
which one is the best candidate right now. We are
testing all the 10 features, and then hopefully
many of them will be good enough to present to
the world. And if not, we will have to have make
another round, and uh, yeah create new ones.
[Robert] Cool, thank you very much. Well, at this moment
we don't have any other questions. Is there
anything that you want to add on this couple of
minutes? Uh, you didn't cover on your presentation?
You have, like, another five minutes if
you have anything, or we can make a break.
[Susanna] I think I'm, I, I hope that people will connect
with us, and I'm happy to answer any question
via email or Twitter, or just reach out to
us and we will be happy to discuss this
more, because I, I think there are a lot of
interesting things and we are really eager
to hear also from WordPress developers, and
designers, and users, and I hope that, that
you will all be interested in this project
and also reach out to us to to learn more.
[Roberto] Awesome. Um, well, we can give it a couple of minutes
and see if there is another question on YouTube.
Okay, we have a question. Uh, the
testers need to be multilingual?
Good question, thank you. Uh, no. The
tests will be performed in English, so
um, you would need to understand at least the
instructions in English, because the prototypes
are in English. But otherwise we don't
have any, any requirements on the testers.
[Roberto] Thank you, Susana.
Anyone, if anyone have another
question, uh right here.
[Susanna] I think it's in the middle of
the night in many countries.
[Roberto] Yes, I, actually for me it's past midnight but, but,
what's your time on your country?
[Susanna] It's now 8:30 in the, in the morning, but it's Saturday,
so I don't think anywhere, exactly.
[Roberto] Yeah, most of Europe people, yeah, [Susanna] still asleep, I
think, yeah. [Roberto] just waiting for this Saturday.
But again, thank you very much for sharing
with us and taking your time, uh get, get um,
I think we're gonna finish this one, uh.
I think Lnn is making a question -
we say, how much time it does it take,
how much time does it take testing? [Susanna] That's another
good question, um, well you can spend as much
time as you like, of course, but you can test
just one feature, and that will take from five
to, I guess, mostly 10 minutes. We, of course, hope
that you test all the the features, and you can
also come back, because we have this iterative
process, so then you can test it again and see
the refinements. But, but you can just spend five or
ten minutes and do one test, and we will be happy,
and if you are really interested and keen then
you can come back and test all the 10 features.
And that will then take, maybe, one and a half
hour or so, and you can also come back and do
it more times, but but there's no, no specific
requirements on time needed. So you can just
do a short one and see if it's interesting and
then, hopefully, you will stay on and do more tests.
[Roberto] And then we have another question for Ahmed, uh
if you have to name one thing that it will be
your biggest achievement in accessibility
what it would be? [Susanna] My biggest achievement? Oh.
Well, personally, I think that, that we are hiring
people with disabilities in our company. I think
that is the biggest achievement for to me
personally, I believe the key to inclusion
is to have a workplace, um, and really that we have
been able to not only hire people ourselves, but
also help other young people with disabilities
to get into the workforce. That is what I'm most
proud of in my professional life. That is not
really accessibility, as such, but I think that is
my sort of spontaneous answer to that question.
[Roberto] Awesome, thank you very much as I think Lnn
also ask, for the previous question, if the time
that you describe is also include the training?
[Susanna] Well, there's no training, really here. In the, I mean
the testing is just really simple prototypes, so
you are doing the same thing as you're normally
doing as when you're creating content. You are
writing a text, you are adding a link, you're
adding an image, and then you are supposed to
add the alt text, and so on. So you are performing
this, this sort of the user scenario from the,
from the web authoring perspective. And then
there's really a short instruction on what we
want you to do to perform that test. So it's not
really, I wouldn't say it's training, uh, really.
So it's a short instruction, then you perform
the text, test and then that is screen recorded,
so we can see what you do. So that is sort of
fine, but we also always ask you if you have
any comments or suggestions or anything. We're
really happy if you want to share with us your
thoughts, so you also have the possibility
to answer some questions afterwards, if you,
if you would like to. But it wouldn't take more
than 15 minutes just to do one, one of the items.
[Roberto] Okay, awesome. Um, I think that's
all the questions that we have.
Um, we're gonna finish the presentation
right here. Thank you very much for your time.
Um, just let the people who is watching this
presentation, don't forget to attend our next talk.
Um, who it will be how to use ARIA in forms, uh,
at 7:00 AM UTC, presented by, by Ryan...Rian,
Rietveld - sorry, my accent, but, yeah. Thank
you very much, and we see you later. Bye!
[Susanna] Thank you.